



Network Working Group                                 F. L. Templin, Ed.
Internet-Draft                                        The Boeing Company
Intended status: Informational                           D. J. Jakubisin
Expires: 21 January 2027      National Security Institute, Virginia Tech
                                                            20 July 2026


       MANET Internetworking: Problem Statement and Gap Analysis
                 draft-ietf-manet-inet-gap-analysis-03

Abstract

   [RFC2501] defines a MANET as "an autonomous system of mobile nodes.
   The system may operate in isolation, or may have gateways to and
   interface with a fixed network" (such as the global public Internet).
   This document presents a MANET Internetworking problem statement and
   gap analysis.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on 21 January 2027.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2026 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents (https://trustee.ietf.org/
   license-info) in effect on the date of publication of this document.
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
   and restrictions with respect to this document.  Code Components
   extracted from this document must include Revised BSD License text as
   described in Section 4.e of the Trust Legal Provisions and are
   provided without warranty as described in the Revised BSD License.



Templin & Jakubisin      Expires 21 January 2027                [Page 1]

Internet-Draft            MANET Internetworking                July 2026


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
   2.  Terminology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
   3.  MANET Use Cases . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
   4.  MANET Internetworking Problem Statement . . . . . . . . . . .   7
     4.1.  Problem 1: MANET Local Addressing . . . . . . . . . . . .   7
     4.2.  Problem 2: Autoconfiguration  . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
     4.3.  Problem 3: MANET-internal Communications  . . . . . . . .  10
     4.4.  Problem 4: MANET Peer to Internetwork Correspondent . . .  11
     4.5.  Problem 5: Internetwork Correspondent to MANET Peer . . .  11
     4.6.  Problem 6: Peer-to-Peer Between Different MANETs  . . . .  12
     4.7.  Problem 7: Stub MANET to Not-so-stubby MANET
           Connections . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  13
   5.  MANET Internetworking Gap Analysis  . . . . . . . . . . . . .  13
     5.1.  Gap 1: Multiple Heterogeneous MANET Interfaces  . . . . .  13
     5.2.  Gap 2: Maximum Packet Size Diversity  . . . . . . . . . .  14
     5.3.  Gap 3: Header Compression . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  14
     5.4.  Gap 4: MANET Border Router Discovery and Engagement . . .  14
     5.5.  Gap 5: MANET Internetworking Security . . . . . . . . . .  15
   6.  MANET Internetworking Solution Proposal Analysis  . . . . . .  15
     6.1.  AERO/OMNI . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  15
     6.2.  NEMO (RFC3963)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  15
     6.3.  LISP-based mobility and overlays  . . . . . . . . . . . .  15
     6.4.  HIP mobility  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  15
     6.5.  DLEP-based MANET deployments with gatewaying  . . . . . .  15
     6.6.  Conventional tunneling / prefix delegation approaches . .  15
   7.  IANA Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  15
   8.  Security Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  15
   9.  Acknowledgements  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  16
   10. References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  16
     10.1.  Normative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  16
     10.2.  Informative References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  16
   Appendix A.  Change Log . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  17
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  18

1.  Introduction

   Mobile Ad-hoc Networks (MANETs) [RFC2501] often include mobile nodes
   with limited range wireless transmission media interfaces that
   establish links via a dynamically changing set of neighbors within
   operational range.  Each mobile node engages a MANET routing protocol
   to discover links to first hop neighbors as well as multihop paths to
   reach other nodes beyond.  As IP routers [RFC0791][RFC8200], MANET
   routers represent multihop paths as "host routes" established through
   either proactive or on-demand discovery.





Templin & Jakubisin      Expires 21 January 2027                [Page 2]

Internet-Draft            MANET Internetworking                July 2026


   Individual MANETs typically include modest numbers of mobile nodes
   (e.g., O(10**1), O(10**2), etc.) which naturally limits the number of
   host routes needed in the local routing system.  MANETs can merge to
   form larger MANETs and/or partition into smaller MANETs according to
   dynamic network conditions such as mobility.  MANETs may also have
   internal clusters with cluster heads that limit the extent over which
   host routes propagate to reduce control message overhead.  Finally,
   MANETs often operate autonomously until they encounter Internetwork
   access points of opportunity.

   Data communications between two nodes within the same MANET local
   routing region follow host routes using MANET-internal links.  When a
   MANET border router establishes an Internetwork link, it can provide
   "Internet connection-sharing" access to the rest of the MANET as a
   connected "stub" network.  Per [RFC2501], "stub networks carry
   traffic originating at and/or destined for internal nodes, but do not
   permit exogenous traffic to "transit" through the stub network".

   Practical applications however suggest that MANETs can act as either
   true stub networks (e.g., a cellphone providing an Internet
   connection sharing peer for a local multihop Wi-Fi region) or as
   "not-so-stubby" networks (e.g., Intelligent Transportation Systems
   where the 5G/6G "SideLink" service supports vehicle-to-vehicle (V2V)
   multihopping).  In the former case, the cellphone acts as an IP
   router for a stub Wi-Fi MANET behind it and the individual Wi-Fi
   nodes act as dependent nodes.  In the latter case, individual 5G/6G
   SideLink nodes can connect the stub MANETs they aggregate across not-
   so-stubby V2V multihop forwarding paths.  MANET Internetworking must
   therefore be capable of accommodating all such scenarios.

   A widely-accepted axiom at the time of this writing suggests that
   there are more cellphones than people on the planet [STATISTA].
   According to Wikipedia, the world population reached 8 billion in
   2022 and is expected to reach 10 billion by 2056 [WIKI].  Each mobile
   node that connects to the global public Internet can in some sense be
   regarded as a singleton "MANET" with the potential to connect still
   larger MANETs.

   MANET Internetworking therefore regards the global Internet as a
   "network of (mobile ad-hoc) networks" with unrestricted dynamic
   relationships between distinct MANET local routing regions joined by
   a Non-Broadcast Multiple Access (NBMA) virtual overlay link
   manifested through encapsulation.  Figure 1 illustrates an example of
   2 distinct MANET local routing regions connected via the NBMA overlay
   using the Internet as transit:






Templin & Jakubisin      Expires 21 January 2027                [Page 3]

Internet-Draft            MANET Internetworking                July 2026


                                .-(::::::::)
                             .-(::: Global ::)-.
                  X==+======(===================)======+==X
                     |        `-(: Internet :)-'       |
                     |           `-(::::::)-'          |
                     |                                 |
              .-(::::::::)                       .-(::::::::)
           .-(::::::::::::)-.                 .-(::::::::::::)-.
          (::::: MANET 1 :::::)              (::::: MANET 2 :::::)
            `-(::::::::::::)-'                 `-(::::::::::::)-'
               `-(::::::)-'                       `-(::::::)-'

                      Figure 1: MANET Internetworking

   While the figure depicts just 2 MANET local routing regions, many
   others worldwide will also want to connect to the virtual link.
   Since a sustained increase in both the world population and number of
   mobile wireless devices is certain, MANET Internetworking must
   therefore accommodate populations on the order of O(10**10) or more.
   This includes address duplication avoidance through operational
   assurance since statistical properties alone may be insufficient to
   avoid duplication in such large populations.

   Since each MANET itself is mobile, its border routers may
   continuously encounter different Internetwork access points as they
   roam while potentially configuring a different IP address at each
   access point.  MANET border routers therefore must not continuously
   inject and withdraw mobile network prefixes into the Internetwork BGP
   routing system as they move since this would result in unacceptable
   churn.  MANET nodes instead maintain stable addresses in a mobility
   service provider overlay over the Internetwork such that the overlay
   addresses remain stable even if the border router's underlay address
   changes frequently.

   The overlay network BGP routing system must similarly be protected
   from mobility churn by maintaining address to mobility anchor point
   mappings in a scalable directory service such as the domain name
   system (DNS).  Efficient path traversal across the overlay must be
   supported through traffic flow diversity per [RFC6437][RFC6438] with
   differentiated services applied within each flow.  This is especially
   important for the common case of multilink MANET nodes (such as
   cellphones with both 5G and Wi-Fi interfaces) where overlay flow
   bindings are necessary for multilink coordination.

   "IPv6 Wireless Access in Vehicular Environments (IPWAVE): Problem
   Statement and Use Cases" [RFC9365] provides a complimentary analysis
   but does not explore MANET-specific idiosyncrasies.  This document
   presents a MANET Internetworking problem statement and gap analysis.



Templin & Jakubisin      Expires 21 January 2027                [Page 4]

Internet-Draft            MANET Internetworking                July 2026


2.  Terminology

   The following terms are defined within the scope of this document:

   Client
      a MANET router that connects to a multilink Internetworking
      service via Proxy/Servers in a Non-Broadcast, Multiple Access
      (NBMA) overlay.

   Gateway
      an overlay multilink network service node that runs an interdomain
      routing protocol (e.g., BGP) to track Client-to-MAP associations.
      Gateways furthermore join multiple Internetworking segments in an
      overlay multilink virtual bridging service to form larger
      Internetworks.

   Internetwork
      a more stable and wide-area terrestrial, non-terrestrial or hybrid
      network that can serve as transit to interconnect disjoint (or
      partitioned) MANET local routing regions.  The global public
      Internet is an example, as are private operator service networks
      either individually or in concatenations with other service
      networks.

   Mobile Ad-hoc Network (MANET)
      the same as defined in [RFC2501]; often includes mobile nodes with
      limited range wireless transmission media interfaces that
      establish links via a dynamically changing set of neighbors within
      operational range and engage in a MANET local routing protocol.

   MANET Border Router
      a MANET router that also has a continuous or intermittent
      interface connection to a transit Internetwork.

   MANET Cluster Head
      a MANET router that joins multiple smaller MANET local routing
      regions to form a single larger local routing region.  Each
      smaller region is seen as a cluster within the larger region.

   MANET Interface
      a node's (typically wireless) limited range transmission media
      interface with indeterminant connectivity properties.

   MANET Router
      a node that runs a routing protocol over one or more MANET
      interfaces to establish multihop forwarding paths within a local
      routing region.




Templin & Jakubisin      Expires 21 January 2027                [Page 5]

Internet-Draft            MANET Internetworking                July 2026


   Mobility Anchor Point (MAP)
      a Proxy/Server that also provides mobility, address/prefix
      autoconfiguration and address resolution services to Clients.  The
      MAP also runs an interdomain routing protocol (e.g., BGP) to
      announce its Client associations to Gateways.  All (reasonably)
      stable Proxy/Servers are eligible to serve as MAPs as part of a
      Distributed Mobility Management (DMM) service.

   Mobile Network Prefix (MNP)
      a longer IP prefix delegated from an MSP (e.g.,
      2001:db8:1000:2000::/56, 2002:192.0.2.8::/46, etc.) and assigned
      to a Client.  Clients receive MNPs from MAP Proxy/Servers and sub-
      delegate them to routers in downstream networks.

   Mobility Service Prefix (MSP)
      an aggregated IP GUA prefix (e.g., 2001:db8::/32,
      2002:192.0.2.0::/40, etc.) assigned to the overlay and from which
      more-specific Mobile Network Prefixes (MNPs) are delegated.

   Proxy/Server
      an overlay multilink network service node in an Internetwork that
      provides proxy forwarding services to MANET border routers and
      other MANET router Clients.

3.  MANET Use Cases

   MANETs have an important role in emergency response communications,
   disaster relief situations, communications in remote and rural areas,
   military operations, vehicular and swarm communications, and low-
   powered Internet of things (IoT) applications.  MANETs provide the
   ability to establish and maintain communications when infrastructure-
   based networks, such as 5G cellular communication systems, are not
   accessible.  As described above, MANETs may also provide Internet
   connectivity to internal nodes, for example, as a "stub" network via
   MANET routers which possess an Internetworking capability and an
   external connection to a radio access network.

   Example use cases of such MANETs include the following:

   *  Disaster Relief: Disaster situations may compromise network
      infrastructure, such as through the loss of base stations in a
      cellular radio access network (RAN).  In this scenario, MANET
      networks can play a role in closing coverage gaps through multi-
      hop routing to nodes within the coverage area of uncompromised
      base stations.  This use case is broadly applicable to any
      situation in which nodes are operating outside or at the periphery
      of RAN coverage.




Templin & Jakubisin      Expires 21 January 2027                [Page 6]

Internet-Draft            MANET Internetworking                July 2026


   *  Tracking and Monitoring: Another example use case is the tracking
      and monitoring of data from low-cost low-power IoT devices
      ("tags") which may be placed on packages during shipment or
      storage.  Such devices may transition in and out of coverage of
      infrastructure-based networks, often being located in environments
      that are not conducive to RF propagation (e.g., shipping
      container, warehouse, etc.).  The ability to discover and connect
      to neighboring MANET-enabled devices and to establish Internet
      connectivity through such MANETs, enables real-time logistics and
      inventory data to be collected opportunistically.

   *  UAV Swarms: local communications within swarms for coordination
      and cooperation is a good use case for MANET networks due to the
      highly mobile dynamic nature of such networks.  Yet swarms may
      also benefit from connectivity to the Internet, or other external
      networks.  And in large swarm-based MANETs, routing of traffic
      through infrastructure networks to MANET endpoints, rather than
      traversing the entire MANET can improve communications throughput
      and reliability.

      Under mobility conditions, distinct UAV swarms defined by MANET
      local routing regions will encounter situations where the local
      regions enter into communications range of each other.  In this
      case, it is desirable to establish cluster heads between these
      regions and to propagation host routes over them as new
      interconnections are available and discovered.  Moreover, UAV
      swarms for which internetworking will be persistent should be able
      to perform local region merger.  In this case, internetworking
      protocols must support seamless merger of the MANET local routing
      regions into a larger region.  Conversely, nodes or collections of
      nodes which leave coverage of the local region should be capable
      of establishing and operating an independent local region at a
      future time.

4.  MANET Internetworking Problem Statement

   MANETs present a unique set of Internetworking challenges not
   addressed by earlier works [RFC5889][RFC9365].  The following sub-
   sections provide MANET Internetworking problem statements.

4.1.  Problem 1: MANET Local Addressing

   MANET Internetworking observes the IP addressing model in ad hoc
   networks [RFC5889].  Each MANET router requires a unique IP address
   for MANET local communications and a unique router ID for
   participation in the local routing protocol.  For MANETs that are
   only intermittently connected to an Internetwork, these IP addresses
   must be generated from prefixes of scope greater than link-local but



Templin & Jakubisin      Expires 21 January 2027                [Page 7]

Internet-Draft            MANET Internetworking                July 2026


   not associated with any infrastructure aggregation points.  For all
   MANET types, each address and router ID must be locally-unique within
   the (limited) MANET local routing region.  For not-so-stubby MANETs,
   each address must also be globally-unique among all MANET local
   routing regions worldwide while router IDs only need be locally
   unique.

   The locally-unique property ensures that no two nodes that
   participate in the routing protocol within the same MANET local
   routing region configure the same address and/or router ID.  The
   globally-unique property for addresses may seem moot until one
   considers that a first MANET can merge with other MANETs, and nodes
   from a first MANET can freely move to other MANETs.  This may allow a
   node from a first MANET where there are no duplicates to interact
   with other MANETs where a duplicate address may be encountered
   resulting in unpredictable behavior and/or communication failures.

   Although the node population for each MANET local routing region is
   likely to be modest, the total population of MANET nodes that may
   join the MANET Internetwork overlay may be on the order of the number
   of worldwide mobile connections (see: Section 1).  Assuming O(10**10)
   wireless connections, if MANET nodes assigned random addresses from a
   64-bit space, the probability of one or more collisions within the
   total world population (i.e., when multiple nodes independently
   configure the same address) exceeds 98% [RFC9374].  With such a high
   likelihood of duplication in the worldwide population, unresolvable
   collisions could disrupt communications.

   When MANET Internetworking is applied to connect routers in different
   not-so-stubby MANETs, independent local routing regions are
   dynamically joined by an overlay that spans any underlying
   Internetworks as a normal course of operational data communications.
   When multiple MANET local routing regions merge in this way, the
   MANET local addresses present in all MANETs must be mutually
   exclusive.

   In the limiting case, all worldwide MANET local routing regions may
   be considered to be persistently merged over the MANET
   Internetworking overlay at all times.  Statistical uniqueness
   properties of random assignments from even very large populations may
   therefore be insufficient to ensure collision freedom since MANET
   Internetworking exposes the full world population of MANET local
   addresses as potential duplicates.

   Nodes in not-so-stubby MANETs should therefore configure MANET local
   addresses managed for global uniqueness even if they first self-
   generate the addresses (e.g., based on a secure hash of a public key)
   before enrolling them in a registration service.  The node assigns



Templin & Jakubisin      Expires 21 January 2027                [Page 8]

Internet-Draft            MANET Internetworking                July 2026


   its MANET local address to an overlay multilink network interface or
   another virtual interface such as a loopback.  Routers in all MANETs
   also configure unique router IDs that may be derived from a globally-
   unique IP address or randomly generated with sufficient statistical
   uniqueness properties within the local region.

   An important use case for IPv6 Link-Local Addresses (LLAs) remains
   even when MANET routers assign MANET local addresses.  MANET routers
   assign LLAs to their MANET interfaces by embedding their interface
   Media Access Control (MAC) addresses within the LLA Interface
   Identifier (IID) [RFC4862][RFC5889].  This provides a next hop
   address for routes discovered by the MANET routing protocol and
   supports stateless forwarding based on the LLA's embedded MAC address
   without requiring address resolution messaging.  Since each MANET
   router assigns a MAC address independently, the possibility for
   duplication exists but this does not present a problem if the MANET
   router sets its router ID to a locally unique value instead of an
   LLA.  Any packets forwarded according to a duplicate next hop LLA
   would simply be deconflicted by the IP layers of the multiple next
   hop routers.

4.2.  Problem 2: Autoconfiguration

   When a MANET comes in contact with a fixed Internetwork such as the
   global public Internet, nodes in the MANET that engage global mobile
   Internetworking services require some means of autoconfiguring
   global-scoped IP addresses or prefixes that are properly routable by
   network elements accessible from the current point of attachment.
   These network elements are typically proxies or gateways of some
   variety that connect to the mobile routing system.

   Nodes in the MANET local routing region that are multiple IP hops
   away from a MANET border router with an Internetwork connection
   cannot use unmodified standard autoconfiguration services including
   IPv6 Neighbor Discovery (IPv6ND) [RFC4861] or DHCPv6 [RFC8415] over a
   MANET interface since these services are link-scoped in nature.  (The
   DHCPv6 architecture includes a "relay" function, but the dynamic
   nature of links in (multi-link) MANET local routing regions may
   interfere with straightforward application of DHCPv6 relays.)

   Two methods of supporting generalized autoconfiguration for nodes
   within a MANET have been suggested.  In a first method (conducted
   directly over MANET interfaces) first-hop neighboring nodes within
   the MANET collectively participate to repeat link-scoped
   autoconfiguration discovery requests to other neighbors that are
   topologically closer to a MANET border router.  This hop-by-hop
   process continues between neighbors until the request arrives at a
   MANET border router that can then contact an Internetwork element



Templin & Jakubisin      Expires 21 January 2027                [Page 9]

Internet-Draft            MANET Internetworking                July 2026


   capable of delegating an Internet Service Provider (ISP) Provider-
   Aggregated (PA) IP address or prefix.  The Internetwork element then
   returns the delegated IP address/prefix in a reply that traverses the
   reverse path to the original requesting node.  Each MANET router then
   configures a route to this IP address/prefix within the MANET local
   routing protocol, i.e., the MANET local routing protocol becomes
   aware of the delegation.

   In a second autoconfiguration method, the requesting node configures
   a (virtual) overlay multilink network interface over its (physical)
   MANET interface(s) and issues standard link-scoped IPv6ND and/or
   DHCPv6 requests over the virtual interface.  The virtual interface
   applies encapsulation to provide the appearance of a single NBMA link
   spanning the entire (multilink) MANET.  This virtual link supports
   standard link-scoped autoconfiguration services coordinated with an
   Internetwork element capable of delegating an address.  For stub
   MANETs, the MANET border router itself delegates a public or private
   IP address.  For not-so-stubby MANETs, an overlay Internetwork
   Mobility Anchor Point (MAP) delegates a Mobile Network Prefix (MNP)
   as an IP prefix maintained by the overlay independently of the
   Internetwork attachment point.  The MAP then returns the delegated IP
   prefix in a link-scoped reply over the virtual interface that
   traverses the reverse path to the original requesting node.

   In one alternative, MANET nodes located one or more hops from a MANET
   border router can regard the MANET border router as a Network Address
   Translator (NAT) to convert MANET local addresses into MNP addresses
   with no autoconfiguration requirements; they can also request address
   delegations directly from the border router's MNP(s) and use them to
   support communications with Internetwork peers according to the stub
   model.  MANET nodes can instead (or in addition) request their own
   MNPs and register their MANET local addresses with a MAP while using
   the MANET border router as a transit intermediate system according to
   the not-so-stubby model.

4.3.  Problem 3: MANET-internal Communications

   Two nodes located within the same local MANET routing region should
   be able to communicate (across multiple hops if necessary) using
   MANET local addressing with no external Internetwork infrastructure
   reference points.  As long as the MANET local addresses configured by
   communicating peers are unique, the MANET local routing system
   maintains continuous multihop forwarding services to ensure session
   continuity.

   Nodes within the MANET local routing region can discover the MANET
   local addresses of peers using services like Multicast DNS (mDNS)
   [RFC6762] supported by Simplified Multicast Forwarding (SMF)



Templin & Jakubisin      Expires 21 January 2027               [Page 10]

Internet-Draft            MANET Internetworking                July 2026


   [RFC6621].  Peer-to-peer communications can then be coordinated in
   multihop fashion using encapsulation and header compression via an
   overlay virtual link spanning any MANET intermediate hops in the
   path.

4.4.  Problem 4: MANET Peer to Internetwork Correspondent

   When an originating peer (or its stub MANET border router) within a
   not-so-stubby MANET needs to communicate with correspondents
   connected elsewhere in an external Internetwork, the peer consults
   the global DNS which returns a (stable) globally-routable IP address
   for the correspondent.  The peer can then use one of its MNP-based IP
   addresses obtained through autoconfiguration and the global IP
   address of the Internetwork correspondent as the source and
   destination addresses for packet exchanges.

   To initiate communications with an Internetwork correspondent, the
   MANET peer first establishes per-flow on-demand virtual circuits in
   the overlay to an Internetwork relay beyond the MANET border.  MANET
   local multihop routing will then convey the peer's original packets
   to the MANET border which then forwards them via the overlay to an
   Internetwork relay which directs the packets to the correspondent
   node.

   In the reverse path, the correspondent uses the MNP-based IP address
   of the peer obtained from the source address of initiating packets as
   the destination address for reply packets.  Standard Internetwork
   routing will direct the packets back to the relay which then forwards
   them via per-flow overlay virtual circuits to the originating peer's
   MANET border.  MANET local routing and forwarding will then convey
   the packets over one or more MANET local hops until they ultimately
   reach the peer.

   In this case, the originating peer's IP address need not appear in
   the global DNS since the correspondent discovers the address by
   examining the source of received packets.

4.5.  Problem 5: Internetwork Correspondent to MANET Peer

   When an Internetwork correspondent needs to communicate with a target
   peer within a MANET local routing region, the correspondent consults
   the global DNS to determine an IP address for the peer.









Templin & Jakubisin      Expires 21 January 2027               [Page 11]

Internet-Draft            MANET Internetworking                July 2026


   The correspondent then forwards packets via standard Internet routing
   until they arrive at a relay.  The relay then establishes per-flow
   virtual circuits in the overlay to the MANET peer while forwarding
   packets via the virtual circuit until they reach the destination.
   Reverse path forwarding from the MANET peer to the Internetwork
   correspondent is then conducted in the same manner described in
   Section 4.4.

   IP addresses covered by delegated prefixes remain stable even across
   MANET-wide mobility events to the point that continuous dynamic
   updates to the DNS are not required to maintain uninterruptable
   communications.  While it is possible that mobility events may cause
   minor temporary disruptions, transport protocol retransmissions will
   maintain continuity for any ongoing sessions.

4.6.  Problem 6: Peer-to-Peer Between Different MANETs

   When two prospective peer nodes are located in different MANET local
   routing regions separated by one or more transit Internetwork
   segments, both peers should include their IP addresses in global DNS
   resource records for the same reasons cited in Section 4.5.

   The peers then establish per-flow virtual circuits in the overlay to
   support peer-to-peer packet forwarding.  The peers may use either an
   MNP address or their MANET local addresses, which are routable within
   the overlay limited domain.  The overlay therefore exhibits the
   outward appearance of a MANET-of-MANETs, where overlay interior nodes
   engage in an interdomain global routing service bridging many MANET
   local routing regions.

   A certain degree of coordination between peer nodes and their MAPs is
   then required to maintain address mappings.  The overlay ensures that
   each peer remains reachable at its stable IP address/prefix through
   distributed mobility management.

   Note that a common use case includes joining multiple partitions of a
   formerly unified MANET local routing region.  The partitions may
   arise from pre-planned or un-planned node mobility patterns, but as
   long as each partition includes a MANET border router with an
   Internetwork connection nodes within different partitions can
   continue to communicate using their MANET local addresses.










Templin & Jakubisin      Expires 21 January 2027               [Page 12]

Internet-Draft            MANET Internetworking                July 2026


4.7.  Problem 7: Stub MANET to Not-so-stubby MANET Connections

   When a MANET border router connects a stub MANET to an Internetwork,
   it can either delegate global-scoped IP addresses to stub MANET nodes
   or apply Network Address Translation (NAT) to non-global scoped
   addresses (e.g., IPv6 Unique Local Addresses) to support external
   communications.

   In the public case, all manners of peer-to-peer communications are
   made possible due to the globally routable nature of the addresses.
   In the NAT case, only communications initiated by a stub network peer
   are supported since the reverse path terminates at the NAT.

   The stub MANET itself may configure a local overlay that regards the
   (multihop) MANET as a single unified link.  In that case, the stub
   network overlay link is distinct from the overlay link that spans the
   global public Internet and the two links are joined by the MANET
   border router acting as an IPv6 router.

   In the not-so-stubby case, a single overlay link extends across both
   any transit Internetworks and the source and target MANETs
   themselves.  All peer-to-peer communications are therefore conveyed
   across a globally-extended MANET Internetworking overlay.

5.  MANET Internetworking Gap Analysis

   Many current and past solution proposals address some aspects of the
   problems articulated in the previous section, but often have
   functional gaps that leave some problems unaddressed.  The following
   gaps must be closed by candidate solutions:

5.1.  Gap 1: Multiple Heterogeneous MANET Interfaces

   In anticipated practices, nodes will often have multiple and
   heterogeneous MANET interfaces connected to the same MANET local
   routing region.  Most notably, the vast majority of cellphones have
   both Wi-Fi and 5G cellular interfaces which will soon support a
   "SideLink" mode of operation for device-to-device communications
   outside of the context of cellular infrastructure.












Templin & Jakubisin      Expires 21 January 2027               [Page 13]

Internet-Draft            MANET Internetworking                July 2026


   With their Wi-Fi interfaces engaged in "ad-hoc" mode and 5G
   interfaces engaged in "SideLink" mode, nodes within a MANET local
   routing region can exchange control information and forward packets
   across multiple hops if necessary even if some hops are carried over
   Wi-Fi and others over 5G SideLink.  A unique addressing scheme is
   also necessary across the heterogeneous combined MANET region to
   maintain consistent and compatible routing information.  Most
   importantly, the addressing schemes between the heterogeneous media
   must be mutually compatible and address assignments must be assured
   unique so that no duplication is possible.

   Aside from cellphones and the like (which represent an enormous use
   case space), multiple heterogeneous MANET interfaces often occur on
   mobile platforms such as tactical military and/or unmanned air
   systems.  These same considerations also apply within any such
   domains.

5.2.  Gap 2: Maximum Packet Size Diversity

   In conjunction with Gap 1, heterogeneous MANET interfaces often also
   support diverse maximum packet sizes also known as the Maximum
   Transmission Unit (MTU).  For example, the initial and final hops of
   a multihop path may support MTUs of 1500 octets or larger while some
   intermediate hops support MTUs as small as 1280 octets.
   Communications must therefore remain continuous and without loss of
   large packets due to a path MTU "black hole".  Any solution proposal
   must therefore address the need for maximum packet size diversity
   given the clear need to support heterogeneous environments.

5.3.  Gap 3: Header Compression

   MANET data plane packets often include sizeable upper layer headers
   including any encapsulations, the IP header and upper layer protocol
   headers.  Especially for smaller packet sizes, the overhead for
   carrying significant header payloads can waste precious wireless
   transmission bandwidth.  Any solution proposal must therefore address
   the need for header compression for multi-hop packet flows.

5.4.  Gap 4: MANET Border Router Discovery and Engagement

   Ordinary MANET nodes must be able to discover and effectively engage
   the best MANET border router(s) especially when multiple alternatives
   may be present.  For example, a MANET with 100 ordinary nodes may
   include 4 MANET border routers that also have longer-range
   Internetworking links such as via LEO satellites.  Each MANET node
   must discover border routers that may be multiple MANET local hops
   away and somehow cause their packets to flow through the MANET to a
   border router that in turn invokes MANET Internetworking.  Any



Templin & Jakubisin      Expires 21 January 2027               [Page 14]

Internet-Draft            MANET Internetworking                July 2026


   solution proposal must therefore address these needs.

5.5.  Gap 5: MANET Internetworking Security

   The fact that a node is admitted into a MANET local routing region
   does not ensure that the node is authorized to establish flow state
   in the MANET and/or invoke MANET Internetworking services.  For that
   reason, a gap exists that requires a solution for securely admitting
   MANET clients into the MANET Internetworking service.  Any solution
   proposal must therefore address the security gap.

6.  MANET Internetworking Solution Proposal Analysis

   The following sections provide an analysis of solution proposals with
   respect to the problem statements and gap analysis:

6.1.  AERO/OMNI

6.2.  NEMO (RFC3963)

6.3.  LISP-based mobility and overlays

6.4.  HIP mobility

6.5.  DLEP-based MANET deployments with gatewaying

6.6.  Conventional tunneling / prefix delegation approaches

7.  IANA Considerations

   This document is an informational problem statement and does not in
   itself request any IANA actions.  IANA considerations can be found in
   solution space documents.

8.  Security Considerations

   MANET Internetworking assumes a multi-layer security architecture.
   Physical and data link layer security is assumed within each local
   MANET local routing region and with proper network layer
   authentication for admitting nodes into the MANET Internetworking
   overlay service.  Transport and higher layer security should then be
   applied for end-to-end confidentiality, integrity and authorization.









Templin & Jakubisin      Expires 21 January 2027               [Page 15]

Internet-Draft            MANET Internetworking                July 2026


9.  Acknowledgements

   Discussions on the MANET working group mailing list helped shape
   concepts exposed in this document.  The following are acknowledged
   for their helpful comments: Abdussalam Baryun, Lou Berger, Stuart
   Card, Juliusz Chroboczek, Christopher Dearlove, Donald Eastlake, Joel
   Halpern and others who provided valuable input on the list or through
   private discussions.

10.  References

10.1.  Normative References

   [RFC0791]  Postel, J., "Internet Protocol", STD 5, RFC 791,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC791, September 1981,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc791>.

   [RFC8200]  Deering, S. and R. Hinden, "Internet Protocol, Version 6
              (IPv6) Specification", STD 86, RFC 8200,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC8200, July 2017,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8200>.

10.2.  Informative References

   [RFC2501]  Corson, S. and J. Macker, "Mobile Ad hoc Networking
              (MANET): Routing Protocol Performance Issues and
              Evaluation Considerations", RFC 2501,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC2501, January 1999,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc2501>.

   [RFC4861]  Narten, T., Nordmark, E., Simpson, W., and H. Soliman,
              "Neighbor Discovery for IP version 6 (IPv6)", RFC 4861,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC4861, September 2007,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc4861>.

   [RFC4862]  Thomson, S., Narten, T., and T. Jinmei, "IPv6 Stateless
              Address Autoconfiguration", RFC 4862,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC4862, September 2007,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc4862>.

   [RFC5889]  Baccelli, E., Ed. and M. Townsley, Ed., "IP Addressing
              Model in Ad Hoc Networks", RFC 5889, DOI 10.17487/RFC5889,
              September 2010, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc5889>.

   [RFC6437]  Amante, S., Carpenter, B., Jiang, S., and J. Rajahalme,
              "IPv6 Flow Label Specification", RFC 6437,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC6437, November 2011,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc6437>.



Templin & Jakubisin      Expires 21 January 2027               [Page 16]

Internet-Draft            MANET Internetworking                July 2026


   [RFC6438]  Carpenter, B. and S. Amante, "Using the IPv6 Flow Label
              for Equal Cost Multipath Routing and Link Aggregation in
              Tunnels", RFC 6438, DOI 10.17487/RFC6438, November 2011,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc6438>.

   [RFC6621]  Macker, J., Ed., "Simplified Multicast Forwarding",
              RFC 6621, DOI 10.17487/RFC6621, May 2012,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc6621>.

   [RFC6762]  Cheshire, S. and M. Krochmal, "Multicast DNS", RFC 6762,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC6762, February 2013,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc6762>.

   [RFC8415]  Mrugalski, T., Siodelski, M., Volz, B., Yourtchenko, A.,
              Richardson, M., Jiang, S., Lemon, T., and T. Winters,
              "Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol for IPv6 (DHCPv6)",
              RFC 8415, DOI 10.17487/RFC8415, November 2018,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc8415>.

   [RFC9365]  Jeong, J., Ed., "IPv6 Wireless Access in Vehicular
              Environments (IPWAVE): Problem Statement and Use Cases",
              RFC 9365, DOI 10.17487/RFC9365, March 2023,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc9365>.

   [RFC9374]  Moskowitz, R., Card, S., Wiethuechter, A., and A. Gurtov,
              "DRIP Entity Tag (DET) for Unmanned Aircraft System Remote
              ID (UAS RID)", RFC 9374, DOI 10.17487/RFC9374, March 2023,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc9374>.

   [STATISTA] Statista, S., "Number of connected devices worldwide as of
              October 2025, by device,
              https://www.statista.com/statistics/1559435/connected-
              devices-worldwide", March 2026.

   [WIKI]     Wikipedia, W., "World population milestones,
              https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/
              World_population_milestones", March 2026.

Appendix A.  Change Log

   << RFC Editor - remove prior to publication >>

   Differences from -01 to -02:

   *  Expanded gap analysis.

   Differences from -00 to -01:




Templin & Jakubisin      Expires 21 January 2027               [Page 17]

Internet-Draft            MANET Internetworking                July 2026


   *  Updated based on list comments and private communications between
      April-June 2026.

   Differences from earlier versions:

   *  First draft publication.

Authors' Addresses

   Fred L. Templin (editor)
   The Boeing Company
   P.O. Box 3707
   Seattle, WA 98124
   United States of America
   Email: fltemplin@acm.org


   Daniel J. Jakubisin
   National Security Institute, Virginia Tech
   2202 Kraft Dr.
   Blacksburg, VA 24060
   United States of America
   Email: djj@vt.edu




























Templin & Jakubisin      Expires 21 January 2027               [Page 18]
